.Dd $Mdocdate: March 12 2023 $
.Dt TELODENDRIA 3
.Os Telodendria Project
.Sh NAME
.Nm Telodendria
.Nd Branding and callback functions specific to Telodendria.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In Telodendria.h
.Vt const char
.Va TelodendriaLogo[][]
.Pp
.Vt const char
.Va TelodendriaHeader[][]
.Pp
.Ft void
.Fn TelodendriaHexDump "size_t" "char *" "char *" "void *"
.Ft void
.Fn TelodendriaMemoryHook "MemoryAction" "MemoryInfo *" "void *"
.Ft void
.Fn TelodendriaMemoryIterator "MemoryInfo *" "void *"
.Ft void
.Fn TelodendriaPrintHeader "LogConfig *"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Pp
This API provides the callbacks used to hook Telodendria into
the various other APIs. It exists primarily to be called by
.Fn main ,
but these functions are not static so that
.Fn
main can be in a separate compilation unit.
.Pp
.Va TelodendriaLogo
and
.Va TelodendriaHeader
are
.Va TELODENDRIA_LOGO_HEIGHT
by
.Va TELODENDRIA_LOGO_WIDTH
and
.Va TELODENDRIA_HEADER_HEIGHT
by
.Va TELODENDRIA_HEADER_WIDTH
character arrays, respectively. They hold C strings that
are used to generate the logo and header.
.Sy NOTE:
the Telodendria logo belong solely to the Telodendria
project. If this code is modified and distributed as a
package other than the official Telodendria source
package, the logo must be replaced with a different
one, or removed entirely. Consult the license section
of 
.Xr Telodendria 7
for details.
.Pp
.Fn TelodendriaHexDump
follows the function prototype required by the
.Fn MemoryHexDump
function, documented in
.Xr Memory 3 .
This function is responsible for outputting memory
hex dumps to the log.
Its fourth parameter is cast to a LogConfig object,
so one should be passed into the
.Fn MemoryHexDump
function.
.Pp
.Fn TelodendriaMemoryIterator
follows the function prototype required by the
.Fn MemoryIterate
function, documented in
.Xr Memory 3 .
This function is executed at the end of the program's
execution and detects leaks that occurred during normal
operation.
.Pp
.Fn TelodendriaMemoryHook
follows the function prototype required by the
.Fn MemoryHook
function, documented in
.Xr Memory 3 .
This function is executed every time an allocation,
re-allocation, or free occurs, and is responsible for
logging memory operations to the log.
.Pp
.Fn TelodendriaPrintHeader
prints the logo and header, along with the copyright
year and holder, and version number out to the log.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Pp
None of the functions in this API return anything.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr Memory 3 ,
.Xr Log 3
