.Dd $Mdocdate: April 20 2023 $
.Dt TELODENDRIA-CONFIG 7
.Os Telodendria Project
.Sh NAME
.Nm telodendria-config
.Nd Telodendria configuration.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Pp
Telodendria is designed to be configurable. It is configured using
JSON, which is intended to be submitted via the administrator API.
This page documents Telodendria's configuration JSON format, which
is used both in the administrator API, and on the disk in the
database. The configuration file on the disk in the database is
.Pa config.json ,
though that file should not be edited directly. Use the API described
in
.Xr telodendria-admin 7
instead.
.Sh DIRECTIVES
Here are the top-level directives:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic listen Ar listenArr
An array of listener description objects. Telodendria supports
listening on multiple ports, and each port is configured
independently of the others. A listener description object looks
like this:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic port Ar port
The port to listen on. Telodendria will bind to all interfaces, so it
is recommended to configure your firewall so you can control what is
allowed to access the Telodendria ports. Note that
Telodendria offers all APIs over each port; there is no way to
control which APIs are available over which ports, although all
APIs should be safe against attacks, so this should not be a
major concern.
.Pp
.Ar port
should be a decimal port number. This directive is required. Common
port numbers are 8008 for non-TLS, and 8448 for TLS.
.It Ic tls Ar tlsObj|null|false
Telodendria can be compiled with TLS support. If it is, then a
particular listener can be set to use TLS for connections. If
.Ic tls
is not
.Ar null
or
.Ar false ,
then it can be an object with the following directives:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic cert Ar file
A certificate file in the format native to the platform's TLS
library. This can be an absolute path, otherwise it is relative
to the data directory.
.It Ic key Ar file
A key file in the format native to the platform's TLS library.
It follows the same rules as the certificate file.
.El
.El
.It Ic serverName Ar name
Configure the domain name of your homeserver. Note that Matrix servers
cannot be migrated to other domains, so once this is set, it should never
change unless you want unexpected things to happen, or you want to start
over.
.Ar name
should be a DNS name that can be publically resolved. This directive
is required.
.It Ic baseUrl Ar url
Set the server's base URL.
.Ar url
should be a valid URL, complete with the protocol. It does not need to
be the same as the server name; in fact, it is common for a subdomain of
the server name to be the base URL for the Matrix homeserver.
.Pp
This URL is the URL at which Matrix clients will connect to the server,
and is thus served as a part of the
.Pa .well-known
manifest.
.Pp
This directive is optional. If it is not specified, it is automatically
deduced from the server name.
.It Ic identityServer Ar url
The identity server that clients should use to perform identity lookups.
.Pp
.Ar url
follows the same rules as
.Ic baseUrl .
.Pp
This directive is optional. If it is not specified, it is automatically
set to be the same as the base URL.
.It Ic runAs Ar uidObj
The effective UNIX user and group to drop to after binding to the socket
and changing the filesystem root for the process. This only works if
Telodendria is running as the root user, and is used as a security mechanism.
If this option is set and Telodendria is started as a non-priviledged user,
then a warning is printed to the log if that user does not match what's
specified here. This directive is optional, but should be used as a sanity
check, if nothing more, to make sure the permissions are working properly.
.Pp
This directive takes an object with the following directives:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic uid Ar user
The UNIX username to drop to. If
.Ic runAs
is specified, this directive is required.
.It Ic gid Ar group
The UNIX group to drop to. This directive is optional; if it is not
specified, then the value of
.Ic uid
is copied.
.El
.Ic log
directive is configured to write to a file, the log file will be written
in the data directory.
.Ar directory
should be an absolute path, under which all Telodendria data will live.
.It Ic federation Ar true|false
Whether to enable federation with other Matrix homeservers or not. Matrix is
by its very nature a federated protocol,  but if you just want to run your
own internal chat server with no contact with the outside, then you can use
this option to disable federation. It is highly recommended to set this to
.Ar true ,
however, if you wish to be able to communicate with users on other Matrix
servers. This directive is required.
.It Ic registration Ar true|false
Whether or not to enable new user registration or not. For security and anti-spam
reasons, you can set this to
.Ar false .
If you do, you can still add users via the administrator API. In an ideal world,
everyone would run their own homeserver, so no public registration would ever
be required. Unfortunately, not everyone has the means to run their own homeserver,
especially because of the fact that public IPv4 addresses are becoming increasingly
harder to come by. If you would like to provide a service to those that are unable
to run their own homeserver, you can set this to
.Ar true ,
which will allow anyone to create an account. Telodendria should be capable of handling
a large amount of users without difficulty or security issues. This directive is
required.
.It Ic log Ar logObj
The log file configuration. Telodendria uses its own logging facility, which can
output logs to standard output, a file, or the syslog. This directive is required,
and it takes an object with the following directives:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic output Ar stdout|file|syslog
The lot output destination. If set to
.Ar file ,
Telodendria will log to
.Pa telodendria.log
inside the data directory.
.It Ic level Ar error|warning|notice|message|debug
The level of messages to log at. Each level shows all the levels above it. For
example, setting the level to
.Ar error
will show only errors, while setting the level to
.Ar warning
will show warnings and errors.
.Ar notice
shows notices, warnings, and errors, and so on. The
.Ar debug
level shows all messages.
.It Ic timestampFormat Ar format|none|default
If you want to customize the timestamp format shown in the log, or disable it
altogether, you can do so via this option. Acceptable values are
.Ar none ,
.Ar default ,
or a formatter string as described by your system's
.Xr strftime 3 .
This option only applies if
.Ic log
is "stdout" or "file".
.It Ic color Ar true|false
Whether or not to enable colored output on TTYs. Note that ANSI color sequences
will not be written to a log file, only a real terminal, so this option only
applies if the log is being written to a standard output which is connected to
a terminal.
.Pp
This option only applies if
.Ic log
is "stdout".
.El
.It Ic threads Ar count
How many worker threads to spin up to handle requests. This should generally be
less than the total CPU core count, to prevent overloading the system. The most
efficient number of threads ultimately depends on the configuration of the
machine running Telodendria, so you may just have to play around with different
values here to see which gives the best performance.
.It Ic maxConnections Ar count
The maximum number of simultanious connections to allow to the daemon. This option
prevents the daemon from allocating large amounts of memory in the event that it
undergoes a denial of service attack. It typically does not need to be adjusted.
.It Ic maxCache Ar bytes
The maximum size of the cache. Telodendria relies heavily on caching to speed
things up. The cache grows as data is loaded from the data directory. All cache
is stored in memory. This option limits the size of the memory cache. If you have
a system that has a lot of memory, you'll get better performance if this option
is set higher. Otherwise, this value should be lowered on systems that have
minimal memory available.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa config.json
The configuration file stored on the filesystem in the data
directory. It is not recommended to edit this directly.
.It Pa /var/telodendria
The recommended data directory.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Pp
A number of example configuration files are shipped with
Telodendria's source code. They can be found in the
.Pa contrib/
directory if you are viewing the source code directly. Otherwise,
if you installed Telodendria as a package, it is possible that the
example configurations were placed in the default locations for
such files on your operating system.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr telodendria-setup 7 ,
.Xr telodendria-admin 7
.Xr telodendria 8
