.Dd $Mdocdate: March 12 2023 $
.Dt HTTP 1
.Os Telodendria Project
.Sh NAME
.Nm http
.Nd A simple command line utility for making HTTP requests.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl i
.Op Fl X Ar method
.Op Fl H Ar header
.Op Fl d Ar data
.Op URL
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
Is a command line HTTP client. It is very heavily inspired by
.Xr curl 1 ,
and even uses the same flag names when possible. However,
.Nm
is designed to be much simpler than
.Xr curl 1 ,
and is built on Telodendria's own
.Xr HttpClient 3
API. It primarily exists to test
.Xr HttpClient 3
and
.Xr HttpServer 3 ,
and make development of Telodendria possible without having
to install any external tools.
.sp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl i
Display the response headers before writing the body.
.It Fl X Ar method
Set the request method. This can be any of the options
allowed by the
.Xr Http 3
API; unlike
.Xr curl 1 ,
it cannot be any arbitrary string.
.It Fl H Ar header
Set a request header, in the form of ``Header: value''. This option
can be set multiple times to add multiple request headers.
.It Fl d Ar data
Send data to the server in the request body. If
.Ar data
starts with ``@'', then the file specified after is opened
and read in. If it is ``@-'', then standard input is used.
Otherwise, the string is passed to the server as-is.
.El
.Pp
.Nm
also requires a
.Ar URL
to make the request to. The URL is parsed by the
.Xr Uri 3
API, so consult that page for the syntax of URLs.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm
exits with
.Va EXIT_SUCCESS
if all command line options were valid, the request was
made successfully, and the server returns an HTTP code
that indicates success. It exits with
.Va EXIT_FAILURE
in all other scenarios.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr HttpClient 3 ,
.Xr Uri 3
