.Dd $Mdocdate: April 29 2023 $
.Dt SEND-PATCH 1
.Os Telodendria Project
.Sh NAME
.Nm send-patch
.Nd Submit a patch file to the Telodendria Patches Matrix room
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op patch
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a simple shell script for submitting patch files to Telodendria's patch
room for review.
.Pp
.Nm
takes a single argument, a patch file. It also reads a number of environment
variables, as described in the following section. This script is designed to be
simple; it only pushes files into a hard-coded Matrix room. Thus, as far as
Matrix clients go, this one is a rather minimal one, and that is by design.
.Pp
This script exists so that users who are working on a machine that doesn't have
a Matrix client installed can still submit work to the Telodendria project. The
goal is to make development as accessible as possible.
.Pp
This script only supports password login, so if your homeserver does not
support password login, it will not work.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Pp
.Nm
utilizes the following environment variables:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev MXID
Your Matrix ID in the standard format. This is used to connect to your
homeserver to send the message.
.It Ev MXPW
Your Matrix account's password. If not set, you will be prompted for your
password by the script, unless
.Ev ACCESS_TOKEN
is set.
.It Ev ACCESS_TOKEN
If you already have an access token for your account, such as one from an
existing session, then you can set this environment variable to bypass the
password authentication flow.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Pp
.Nm
does utilize the
.Pa .env
file, just like
.Xr td 1 .
Consult that page for the specifics of the
.Pa .env
file.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr td 1

