.Dd $Mdocdate: September 23 2022 $
.Dt TELODENDRIA.CONF 5
.Os Telodendria Project
.Sh NAME
.Nm telodendria.conf
.Nd Configuration file for Telodendria
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is the configuration file for the Telodendria homeserver,
.Xr telodendria 8 .
Telodendria is designed to be extremely configurable. As such,
it has a fairly extensive configuration file. The configuration
file can be passed to the Telodendria binary with the
.Sy -f
option, and is typically located at
.Pa /etc/telodendria.conf
.sp
.Nm
uses OpenBSD-style syntax, though it is a little more rigid in its
parser. All values must be surrounded by quotes, and each directive
must be ended with a semicolon.
.Sh MACROS
Macros can be defined that will later be expanded in context.
Macro names must start with a letter, digit, or underscore, and may
contain only those characters. Macros are not expanded inside quotes.
.sp
For example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
macro1 = "value1";
directive $macro1;
.Ed
.Sh GLOBAL OPTIONS
Here are the settings that can be set globally:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic listen Ar port
The port to listen on. Telodendria will bind to all interfaces, but it
is recommended to configure your firewall so that it only listens on
localhost, and then configure a reverse proxy such as
.Xr relayd 8
in front of it, because Telodendria does not implement TLS. Note that
Telodendria doesn't provide multiple ports for the various services it
offers. ALl APIs are made available over the same port, so care should
be taken in
.Xr relayd.conf 5
to ensure that only the public Matrix API paths are made available over
the internet.
.Ar port
should be a decimal port number. This directive is entirely optional. If
it is omitted, then Telodendria will listen on port 8008 by default.
.It Ic server-name Ar name
Configure the domain name of your homeserver. Note that Matrix servers
cannot be migrated to other domains, so once this is set, it should never
change unless you want unexpected things to happen, or you want to start
over.
.Ar name
should be a DNS name that can be publically resolved. This directive
is required.
.It Ic chroot Ar directory
Change the root directory to the specified directory as soon as possible.
Note that all other paths and files specified in
.Nm
must be accessible relative from this directory. This directive only
takes effect if Telodendria is running as root. If it isn't, then a
warning is printed to the log, and no
.Xr chroot 2
call is made. In that case, Telodendria will still change into the
specified directory, so that the other paths referenced can be made
relative to this one. This directive is required. It is expected that
the homeserver data and logs will be stored in a subdirectory of this one.
.It Ic id Ar uid Ar gid
The effective UNIX user and group to drop to after binding to the socket
and changing the filesystem root. This only works if Telodendria is
running as the root user, and is used as a security mechanism. If Telodendria
is started as a non-priviledged user, then a warning is printed to the log
if that user does not match what's specified here. This directive is
required, even if Telodendria is unable to switch to the given user and
group. It should be used as a sanity check to make sure the permissions are
working properly.
.It Ic data-dir Ar directory
The data directory into which Telodendria will write all user and event
information. Telodendria doesn't use a database like other Matrix homeserver
implementations; it uses a flat-file directory structure, similar to how an
SMTP server uses Maildirs to deliver email. This directive is required.
.Ar directory
should be a path relative to the
.Ic chroot
directory. Don't depend on the
.Ic chroot
option working, because there may be legitimate cases when Telodendria will
not be started as root, thus causing the chroot to fail.
.It Ic federation Ar true|false
Whether to enable federation with other Matrix homeservers or not. Matrix is
by its very nature a federated protocol,  but if you just want to run your
own internal chat server with no contact with the outside, then you can use
this option to disable federation. It is highly recommended to set this to
.Ar true ,
however, if you wish to be able to communicate with users on other Matrix
servers. This directive is required.
.It Ic registration Ar true|false
Whether or not to enable new user registration or not. For security and anti-spam
reasons, you can set this to
.Ar false .
If you do, you can still add users via the administrator API. In an ideal world,
everyone would run their own homeserver, so no public registration would ever
be required. Unfortunately, not everyone has the means to run their own homeserver,
especially because of the fact that public IPv4 addresses are becoming increasingly
harder to come by. If you would like to provide a service to those that are unable
to run their own homeserver, you can aset this to
.Ar true ,
which will allow anyone to create an account. Telodendria should be capable of handling
a large amount of users without difficulty or security issues. This directive is
required.
.It Ic log Ar file|stdout
The log configuration. Telodendria uses its own logging facility, which can output to
either standard output or a file. A number of child directives can be added to this
directive to customize the log output:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic level Ar error|warning|task|message|debug
The level of messages to log at. Each level shows all the levels above it. For
example, setting the level to
.Ar error
will show only errors, while setting the level to
.Ar warning
will show warnings and errors.
.Ar task
shows tasks, warnings, and errors, and so on. The
.Ar debug
level shows all messages.
.It Ic timestampFormat Ar format|none|default
If you want to customize the timestamp format shown in the log, or disable it
altogether, you can do so via this option. Acceptable values are
.Ar none ,
.Ar default ,
or a formatter string as described by your system's
.Xr strftime 3 .
.It Ic color Ar true|false
Whether or not to enable colored output on TTYs. Note that ANSI color sequences
will not be written to a log file, only a real terminal, so this option only
applies if the log is being written to a standard output which is connected to
a terminal.
.El
.It Ic threads Ar count
How many worker threads to spin up to handle requests. This should generally be
less than the total CPU core count, to prevent overloading the system. The most
efficient number of threads ultimately depends on the configuration of the
machine running Telodendria, so you may just have to play around with different
values here to see which gives the best performance.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /etc/telodendria.conf
The default
.Xr telodendria 8
configuration file.
.It Pa /var/telodendria
The recommended chroot directory.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Please consult the default
.Nm
that ships with Telodendria for a complete example. If you installed Telodendria
as a package, then the example should be located at the default location. If you
are building from source, you can find the default config in the
.Pa contrib/
directory.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr telodendria 8
