.Dd $Mdocdate: September 22 2022 $
.Dt TELODENDRIA 7
.Os Telodendria Project
.Sh NAME
.Nm Telodendria
.Nd The terminal branches of an axon.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a Matrix homeserver written entirely from scratch in ANSI C.
It is designed to be lightweight and simple, yet functional.
.sp
.Sy Note:
.Nm
is under
.Sy heavy
development. Please see
.Em PROJECT STATUS .
.sp
.Nm
differentiates itself from the other Matrix homeserver
implementations because it:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Is written in C, a stable, low-level programming language with a
long history, low build and runtime overhead, and wide compatibility.
.It
Is written with minimalism as a primary design goal. Whenever possible
and practical, no third-party libraries are pulled into the source code.
Everything
.Nm
needs is custom written. As a result,
.Nm
depends only on a standard C compiler and a POSIX C library to be built,
both of which should come with any good Unix-style operating system already,
which means you shouldn't have to install anything extra.
.It
Uses a flat-file directory structure to store data instead of a database.
This has a number of advantages:
.Bl -bullet
.It
It makes setup and maintenance much easier.
.It
It allows
.Nm
to run on systems with fewer resources.
.El
.It
Is packaged as a single small, statically-linked and highly-optimized binary
that can be run just about anywhere. It is designed to be extremely easy to
set up and consume as few resources as possible.
.It
Is permissively licensed.
.Nm
is licensed under a modified MIT license, which imposes very few restrictions
on what you can do with it.
.El
.sp
.Nm
is on Matrix! Check out the official Matrix rooms:
.sp
.TS
tab(;);
l l.
Room;Description
----;-----------
#telodendria-releases:bancino.net;Get notified of new releases.
#telodendria-general:bancino.net;General discussion and support.
#telodendria-issues:bancino.net;Report bugs and issues.
#telodendria-patches:bancino.net;Submit code patches to the project.
.TE
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr telodendria 8 ,
.Xr telodendria.conf 5 ,
.Xr td 8
.Sh STANDARDS
.Nm
conforms to the Matrix Specification v1.3.
.Sh HISTORY
At this time,
.Nm
does not have any tagged releases because it is not yet functional
as a Matrix homeserver. Please checkout out
.Em PROJECT STATUS
to see where things are currently at. When
.Nm
is mature enough to have a change log, it will go in this section.
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
was started by
.An Jordan Bancino Aq Mt @jordan:bancino.net .
Contributions to the code, website, documentation, or other
components of
.Nm
were made by the following people:
.sp
.An Jonah Evans Aq Mt @jonah:bancino.net
.Sh LICENSE
All of the code and documentation for
.Nm
is licensed under a modified MIT license. Please consult the
.Pa src/header.txt
file for the actual license text. The
.Nm
license text differs from the MIT license in the following ways:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Where the MIT license states that the copyright notice and permission
notice shall be included in all copies or
.Pa substantial
portions of the software, the
.Nm
license requires the copyright notice and permission notice be included
with
.Pa all
portions, regardless of the size, of the software by omitting the word
.Pa substantial .
.El
.sp
The
.Nm
logo, however, belongs solely to the
.Nm
project. It must only be used to represent the official
.Nm
project, and may only appear in official
.Nm
media. If
.Nm
is forked, the logo must be removed completely from the project, and
optionally replaced with a different one. The logo may not be modified
in any way or for any purpose.
